# Davenport Park  1_West Side_ Davenport Park.JPGNW corner Main and Cedar Streets “Remember the Maine” Memorial located here. A granite wedge-shaped monument surmounted by a bronze shaft bearing and American eagle, created in 1922. On the monument are the original shield and scroll recovered from the battleship Maine, blown up in Havana Harbor in 1898. The base of the monument, triangular in shape to resemble a ship’s prow, was designed by Edwin S. Kent and was dedicated in memory of soldiers and sailors of the Spanish-American War. # Bangor House
2_West Side_ Bangor House.JPG
Corner Main and Union Streets, built 1833-1834 
Survivor of stagecoach, schooner and steamboat days, and the last survivor of the “palace hotels” in the country. It was built on the same plan as Boston’s Tremont House, though smaller in scale. Financed by wealthy lumbermen and designed by Isaiah Rogers, the Bangor House opened in 1834 in a New Year’s Ball celebration. It was only a short walk but a world away from the Penobscot River and Devil’s Half Acre, a bawdy district where lumbermen, dockworkers and sailors frequented grog shops and brothels. One of the hotel’s first functions was a dinner for Daniel Webster, then New England’s favorite son as presidential candidate. President Ulysses S. Grant stayed at the Bangor House when he came to officially open the European-North American Railroad. Notable Bangor House guests also included Arthur Harrison, Theodore Roosevelt, Stephen A. Douglas, and Oscar Wilde. The cuisine was famous – chicken and steak for breakfast, as well as Penobscot River salmon, venison, and moose in season. All these delicacies were part of the American plan which also included a fine room. Some rooms had adjoining parlors. In the days of Prohibition in Maine, hotels and restaurants operated under the Bangor Plan.  The bar operator paid a standard fine in court twice a year and was politely ignored by police the rest of the time. Carrie A. Nation, the hatchet-wielding prohibitionist, wrote in her memoirs that the Bangor House manager, Captain Horace Crockett Chapman, was the worst rum seller in the country!#	Isaac Farrar Mansion

3_West Side_Isaac Farrar Mansion.JPG166 Union Street This Greek revival design, which incorporates elements of English Regency style, was designed by Richard Upjohn in 1833 and built 1838-1846. Farrar was an important merchant and banker who had the house built as a wedding present for his wife. A circular room is finished throughout with solid mahogany from Santo Domingo. # Thomas A. Hill House4_West Side_Thomas A Hill House_Bangor Museum and History Center.JPG159 Union Street, built 1834-1835 Distinguished structure designed by Richard Upjohn, one of the giants in American architectural history, for businessman-lawyer Hill. The house was built in Greek Revival style with Ionic columns; the large Italianate double doors were an 1840’s modification. In 1871 President Ulysses S. Grant was entertained in this house. It is now the home of Bangor Museum and History Center. #	George Brown House, built 1835-1836, and George W. Pickering House, 1835-1837 43 & 39 High Street5_West Side_George Brown House and George W.Pickering House.jpg
Both houses were designed by Bangor architect Charles G. Bryant and both have the same design. Each shows the influence of the fashionable Greek Revival in corner block trim, Ionic columns, sidelights and carved rosettes, vine scrolls, and leaf designs. #	Hannibal Hamlin House6_West Side_Hannibal Hamlin House.jpg15 Fifth Street. Built between 1848-1851 It was acquired in 1851 by Hamlin, who served as Lincoln’s first vice president, 1861-1865. It is of Italianate style with deep eaves and Doric porch columns. Mr. Hamlin converted the original roof to a Mansard type, adding a third story. Features of the gracious interior include two black marble fireplaces, a gracefully curved white staircase, ceiling to floor drawing room windows with paneled shutters, and beautifully painted doors with glass knobs. The Hamlin House became the official residence of presidents of the Theological Seminary when Hannibal E. Hamlin of Ellsworth, son of the Vice President, gave the house and its furnishings to the Seminary in 1933. # Bangor Theological Seminary7_West Side_Theological Seminary.JPG NW corner of Union and Hammond StreetsThe oldest institution in Bangor and the only one of its kind in northern New England, it was incorporated as the Maine Charity School in 1804. The whole campus is on the National Register of Historic Places and listed under the Bangor ordinance. Important buildings include Maine Hall, built 1833-1835, architect Charles H. Pond, and the gymnasium, built 1897, architect Wilfred E. Mansur, remodeled as the Wellman Commons. In the rigorous days of its past when the students got their water from a campus well and used stoves and oil lamps, they could save ten cents a week on board by not drinking tea or coffee. Notable alumni include Civil War general and Maine governor Joshua Lawrence Chamberlain and U.S. Congressman Samuel C. Fessenden.# Joseph C. White House8_West Side_Joseph C White House.jpg19 West BroadwayBuilt 1866-1868, attributed to Calvin Ryder of Boston Designed in the fashionable Mansard style, this house was one of several mansions built after the Civil War on West Broadway. This one was erected for the fabulous sum of $15,000. Notice the unusually large lot sizes which display a taste for the bucolic and picturesque effects in suburban landscaping. #	William Arnold House9_West Side_William Arnold House.JPG47 West BroadwayBuilt 1854-1856, architect Benjamin S. Deane. Bangor’s only Italianate villa, this house was the first built on the street. The first owner ran a prosperous livery stable. Over the years a Queen Anne tower, a new front porch, and a porte-cochere were added to keep the house current in style. The custom wrought-iron fence was added by the present owners, Stephen and Tabitha King. #	Harry W. Smith-William L. Miller House10_West Side_Harry W Smith and William L Miller House.jpg65 West Broadway, Built 1891-1892Architects Cook, Hapgood & Co. of Hartford. One of the city’s important Shingle style houses, a style most closely associated with coastal summer homes in Maine. The circular tower, irregular window groupings and the second story gabled porch show the influence of the Queen Anne style. #	Joseph Low House11_West Side_Joseph Low House.jpg51 Thomas Hill Roadbuilt 1857 One of the best examples of Italianate architecture in the city, architect Harvey Graves of Boston. #	Thomas Hill Standpipe12_West Side_Standpipe on Thomas Hill.JPGThomas Hill RoadBuilt 1897, designed by Ashley B. Tower of Holyoke, MA The standpipe is unique in the nation as a water tower-observatory in the Shingle style. It commands a sweeping view of the city and the hills beyond. When lit at night, it’s known as “the diamonds in the crown of the Queen City.” The standpipe is open to the public one day a season; contact the Bangor Water District for more information on visiting.#	Nathaniel Hatch House13_West Side_Nathaniel Hatch House.jpg117 Court StreetBuilt 1832-1833 A brick house with two temple fronts, it was designed by Charles G. Bryant of Bangor. The temple-front type of Greek Revival House, a very correct interpretation of the style, is rare in Bangor. This house’s rear portico once provided a splendid view over the Kenduskeag Stream. # William Augustus Blake House14_West Side_William Augustus Blake House.jpg107 Court StreetBuilt 1858Architect Calvin Ryder. This house was designed for a wealthy Bangor banker, William Blake, in the Mansard or Second Empire style. It now houses the Prentiss and Carlisle Company. All of the original plans are preserved.# Norumbega Parkway15_West Side_Norumbega Parkway_Hamlin Statue.JPG15b_West Side_Norumbega Parkway_Hamlin Statue 2.JPGCentral StreetNorumbega Hall occupied this site from 1854 until it burned in the Great Fire of 1911. This garden spot in the midst of the city was created in 1933 through a bequest from Luther H. Peirce. Its name, once applied to Penobscot Bay and vicinity, is the old Spanish word meaning ‘country of the Norwegians/Northmen’ and is also interpreted as the Penobscot word signifying ‘still water between falls.’ In the mall is a memorial to the martyred dead of all wars. Designed by Charles E. Tefft, the figure of a woman, palm fronds in one hand and a lambent light in the other, rests on a bronze pedestal. # Kenduskeag Mall16_West Side_ Interior Norumbega Hall.JPGA continuation of the parkway, it lies between Central and State Streets. The name kenduskeag, a local Native American word meaning ‘eel catching place,’ was applied to Bangor until its incorporation in 1791. A bronze plaque and boulder here commemorates the landing of Samuel de Champlain in 1604. Near the boulder are two cannons, one a relic of the Spanish-American War, the other a piece recovered from one of the American ships sunk in the river during the Penobscot Expedition retreat in 1779. Charles Tefft also struck the bronze statue of Vice President Hannibal Hamlin which rises in the center of the mall. From 1853 until the Great Fire, the U.S. Custom House and Post Office stood here. # Bangor Savings Bank17_West Side_ Bangor Savings Bank.JPG17b_West Side_Bangor Savings Bank_1911.jpg2 State StreetBuilt 1912architects Carrere & Hastings Built after the disastrous 1911 fire, this Beaux-Arts granite building was built in the form of a classical temple. Notice the original pair of iron torchere-shaped lights beside the door. #	Wheelwright & Clark Block (now Mexicali Blues)18_West Side_Wheelwright and Clark Building.bmp1 West Market SquareBuilt 1859 The first business block in Maine in the French or Second Empire style, architect Benjamin S. Deane. This building survived the Great Fire and urban renewal. # Pickering Block19_West Side_Pickering Block.jpg105 Main StreetBuilt 1871architect George W. Orff of BangorExample of Second Empire style, granite quarried in Frankfort, Maine. It is individually on the National Register and now part of the Main Street Historic District on the north side of the street. The West Market Square Historic District covers much of the opposite side of Main Street.
# Morse & Co. Business Office 
1_East Side_Morse and Co Office Bldg.jpgBuilt 1895Valley AvenueWilfred E. Mansur, architectListed on the National Register of Historic PlacesIn 1851 Llewellyn Morse and Hiram Oliver leased a sawmill which they later purchased on the Kenduskeag Stream.  They purchased another mill on the same stream in 1860 and later the company engaged in diverse business activities.  The Morse company was especially noted for its fine exterior and interior finishes and provided materials for rebuilding large areas of Bangor after the disastrous fire of 1911.  For nearly 100 years it was Bangor’s largest firm.# Bangor Public Library2_East Side_Bangor Public Library.jpg2b_East Side_Bangor Public Library_1911.jpg145 Harlow Streetfounded in 1883The finest in the country for a city of this size.  Its Reference Department is a statewide resource and is called upon by many other states here and abroad.  Collections of painting include some by Jeremiah Hardy.  This building and adjacent high school were built after the 1911 fire by Peabody and Strearns, Boston architects.# Peirce Memorial145 Harlow StreetLocated on Harlow Street next to the library, it was a gift to the city from the late Luther H. Peirce.  This memorializes Maine’s colorful river-drivers in a bronze statue executed by Charles Tefft, a native of Brewer, Maine.  A group of three drivers is depicted prying the key log out of a jam.  They are shown with axe, cantdog, and peavey engaged in the hazardous tasks of freeing the logs for the journey downstream.  The base, approach, and pedestal are the works of Crowell and Lancaster, Bangor architects.# Bangor City Hall (pre-fire of 1911)4_East Side_Old City Hall.jpg73 Harlow StreetBuilt 1912-15Visitors welcomeModeled after a Federal Post Office building in Danville, Illinois but this design is an improvement on it. Oscar Wenderoth, U.S. Treasury Supervising Architect.# John Ham House5_East Side_John Ham House.jpg112 BroadwayBuilt 1832A gable roofed late Federal house with attached ell.  # Philo A. Strickland House6_East Side_Philo A Strickland House.jpg144 BroadwayBuilt 1866In the first decade after the American Civil War, the Mansard style was adopted for many pretentious Bangor houses.# Samuel Smith House7_East Side_Samuel Smith House.jpg157 BroadwayBuilt 1834-1835Charles G. Bryant, architectThe house features fluted Doric columns and intricate carved detail.  The small balcony served as a viewing stand for such dignitaries as James G. Blaine, William McKinley, and James Garfield.# John A. French House8_East Side_John A French House.jpg151 BroadwayBuilt 1833-1834A five-bay hipped roof structure built in the Federal style but now with Italianate changes.# Jones-Veazie Double House9_East Side_Jones Veazie Double House.jpg97-99 BroadwayBuilt 1834Next to this is the Dominicus Parker-John G. Brown Double House, 77-79 Broadway, built in 1834-1835.  Charles H.Pond was the architect.  These two buildings were modeled after brick double houses on Beacon Hill in Boston.# Edward Kent-Jonas Cutting Double House10_East Side_Edward Kent and Jonas Cutting Double House.jpg48-50 Penobscot StreetBuilt 1833An unusually fine example of local Greek Revival architecture.  Charles Bryant designed and built the structure.  The house was built for Edward Kent and his law partner, Jonas Cutting.  Kent served as Bangor’s mayor in 1836 and 1837, as Governor of maine in 1838 and 1840, and later as an Associate Justice on the Maine Supreme Court, 1859-1877.# Jonathan Eddy House11_East Side_Jonathan Eddy House.jpg181 State StreetBuilt 1854-1855The first Mansard house in Bangor by Bangor architect, Darius Lawrence.# St. John’s Catholic Church12_East Side_St. John's Catholic Church.jpgBuilt 1855-1856Corner of York Street and Boyd StreetThis edifice is on the National Register of Historic Places.  It was designed by Patrick Keely of New York, a native of Ireland, who was a very important architect with a specialty in churches.  The congregation of St. John’s was led by John Bapst, S.J., the famous Jesuit who later became the first Rector of Boston College.  Bapst was tarred and feathered by “Know-Nothings” in Ellsworth.  The Bangor community was greatly shocked by this incident and gave him a testimonial dinner to try to compensate for the indignity.  When this church was built, it replaced the first Roman Catholic Church in the city, St.Michael’s, on Boynton Street.  Presumably, the name was changed to honor Fr. John Bapst.  The Church, a Gothic Revival structure, contains a majestic pipe organ and magnificent stained glass windows which were imported from the Austrian Tyrol in 1876.# Congregation Beth Israel Synagogue13_East Side_Congregational Beth Israel Synagogue.JPGBuilt 1911-1912York StreetHenry L. Lewen, architectThe Synagogue’s concrete walls are scored to resemble granite cobblestones.  The design incorporates elements from the Classical, Byzantine, and American heritages.# Charles W. Jenkins House14_East Side_Charles W Jenkins House.jpgFormerly located at 21 Adams Street and moved to its present location at 67 Pine Street in 1989.Built 1845Andrew Wiggin and Joseph Fogg, architectsMeticulously restored, the Jenkins House is a simple and effective local interpretation of the Gothic Style; in the forefront of Gothic Revival as used for residences in America.# Hayward Peirce House15_East Side_Hayward Peirce House.jpg42 BroadwayBuilt 1851Benjamin S. Dean, architectThis house is a fine Italianate design.  The Bangor Daily Whig and Courier of August 19, 1851 reported, “Elegant Mansion: Hayward Pierce (sic) Esq. is now erecting on the commanding and eligible lot,…a capacious and elegant mansion, which will be at once an ornament to our city.”  # George K. Stetson House16_East Side_George Stetson House.jpg208 French StreetBuilt 1847Benjamin S. Dean, architectBuilt in the Greek Revival style.  Stetson was